Where “I’ll Get To It Later” Becomes “I’ll Get To It Now”
Dev Bootcamp 

September 21, 2014

The process that led me to Dev Bootcamp was one of personal and professional rugs being pulled out from under me, all in quick succession, to the utter discomfort, terror and destabilization of myself, my identity, and my self-worth. As I learn more about Dev Bootcamp and the philosophy that attracted me to this safe haven learning community, I’m starting to realize that those rugs were cushioning me from the harsh reality that the path I had set myself on did not really align with what I loved doing, what I cared about, and who I thought of myself as.

When Shereef talks about the creator mindset, he’s discussing a way of thinking that encompasses much more than making things – he’s talking about making yourself. A creator owns their identity, owns what they want to achieve, owns their talents and shortcomings, and does something about it, does something with it, and does something for themselves and for those around them. Dev Bootcamp, as an experimental collaboration between passionate people who want to take control of their destinies – Well, Dev Bootcamp is a place where all of us can learn that owning your identity is possible. The philosophy that enables students to contribute to their own education and the education of their peers is a way of thinking that constantly reminds us that becoming who we want to be is something we can start doing right now. That’s the exciting part of all of this – and that’s the scary part of all of this.

It’s scary because Shereef is right, there are fears that grip us and challenge us (we wouldn’t be at Dev Bootcamp if we didn’t have them, I don’t think). For me, Imposter Syndrome is a constant source of anxiety – as someone who loves computers and has cared passionately about technology my whole life, I constantly worry that I’m going to be found out that I’m not actually an expert, that I’m not a programming master, that I don’t understand the machines that others expect me to understand. 

One of the scariest parts of joining Dev Bootcamp is admitting to myself and the world all the things I don’t know. I love learning and I know learning is a life-long process, but not knowing, or finding out I don’t have what it takes to be a computer wizard, is absolutely terrifying.

But it’s going to be okay. That’s what I’m telling myself. Because this is an experiment. This is a collaboration. We’re in this together and, as the guy who showed up to the very first Dev Bootcamp put it, “I’m just so happy this is actually real.” It is real, because none of us have ever been this close to doing what we were meant to do and discovering who we really are. That’s what makes something real.

And in my mind, Dev Bootcamp is the place where “I’ll get to it later” becomes “I’ll get to it now”. Furthermore, Dev Bootcamp isn’t where “It” means becoming a programmer; it’s where “It” is the person you want to be. “It” is the person you are, but maybe don’t have the confidence or particular set of skills to really see yourself as that person. “It” is the person you’ve been putting off, ignoring the calls and the left messages. It is time for “It”. I’m ready to dive in, head-first, into Dev Bootcamp’s collaborative, creator-mindset culture. I’m ready to get involved and grow alongside my peers. I’m ready to learn. I’m ready to get to it now.